In the past few graduation programs, we've had a new feature entitled The Inside Story.
And we're going to have another inside story.
One of the instructors, Brother Trent Leapold, is now going to present the two of us.
Far in the North Atlantic to the islands of the South Pacific,
you will meet some cool and colorful brothers and sisters in this 145th class.
They sort of on five continents represent 31 countries and speak more than 45 individual or different languages.
So let's meet our first guest and he's from the Central European Branch, Brother Alex Schultz.
Alex, I understand in your assignment, you have quite an expansive assignment.
Well, I work with a team that helps foreign language circuits.
Okay, very nice. So foreign language circuits in Germany.
And not just Germany, further.
Foreign language circuits in the Central European Branch.
Even a little further, Trent.
Okay, Alex, you're going to have to help me out with this.
What exactly does your assignment evolve?
Well, our team in the Central Europe branch works with 22 other branch offices
to form and coordinate foreign language circuits that span the continent.
In languages that are assigned to the project by the service committee of the governing body.
Wow, that sounds huge.
There must be a good reason for it.
Yeah, sure, there is.
I mean, as we know, normally, a circuit consists of a group of congregations
and perhaps a few groups within one branch territory.
Now, in Europe, we know we have quite a number of countries
and also a number of branch territories.
So what happened in the past is that in some languages
there were foreign language congregations or groups
that had to be visited by a local circuit overseer
who didn't speak the language.
And that was simply because perhaps in this branch territory
they didn't have a circuit overseer who speaks the language
or they didn't have enough congregations to form their own foreign language circuit
in that branch territory.
And that, of course, poses a challenge if the CEO doesn't speak that language
or he's not so familiar with the territory or that language.
Sure, I can see that.
And then it would be difficult for him to really give specific direction
to the congregation.
And that's the thing.
And some publishers in these groups perhaps felt isolated.
Besides, they didn't necessarily have a circuit assembly or pioneer meeting
in their language or in their vicinity.
Right.
But I know the governing body made a change about that.
Yeah, and that was excellent.
I mean, it's a beautiful project.
Since 2016, we have now what we call foreign language circuits
that span branch territories in Europe.
Okay. Well, how does this work now?
Well, imagine Europe or perhaps best we take a look at a map.
We have a map of Europe.
Super.
Very good.
And this is how we look at Europe in this project.
Europe without borders.
Okay.
All we want to see is where are the foreign language congregations in groups?
So maybe best we can see this in one example with the Chinese field.
Wow.
So we look at all the congregations in groups.
We see them depicted here.
And simply what we do is we group them together by a number of parameters
into circuits.
But this is regardless of any national borders.
And what results is all these groups and congregations are in actual circuits.
They have their circuit events.
They have their pioneer meetings.
And they have their circuit overseer who speaks their language.
And they meet together for circuit assemblies.
More people come together from various countries.
Wonderful atmosphere.
Very nice. That's incredible.
So this is the Chinese circuit.
That's Chinese.
We have Russian here with the 20 circuits that we have right now that span Europe.
And here's the Romani field with growing circuits in Europe.
Very interesting.
I mean, how many are we talking about Alex?
Right now we have in the project 115 circuits
with more than 4,000 congregations in groups involved.
Wow.
And as to date, 18 languages have been assigned to the project.
That is remarkable.
So what would you say?
How are the brothers and sisters in these foreign language congregations in circuits benefit?
Well, we have very positive reflections from the field.
The publishers often appreciate the fact that they now receive
theocratic care by a circuit overseer who speaks their language.
And that's a beautiful aspect.
Besides that, because of this, now,
theoretically borderless Europe, if we want to call it this way,
we as branch offices have more opportunity to work together
to organize conventions in these languages,
circuit assemblies, schools, pioneer meetings,
and all of this furthers the preaching work.
And that's amazing to see.
Well, that's the benefit, isn't it? That's tremendous.
You know, Alex, for us in Gilead, most of the instructors of Gilead,
we've been in the circuit work.
So, circuit work is close to our hearts.
As I'm looking at these huge circuits, I'm asking myself,
how do these circuit overseers care for such huge territories?
What is it like?
You know, that's a very good question,
because these brothers and sisters work so hard in these fields.
Actually, we have a little video that follows one traveling couple,
brother and sister Dietrich.
They are traveling in one of the Albanian circuits
that span branch territories in Europe.
And if you like, we could take a look at the video and see how they're doing.
Excellent. Let's look at the video now then.
Today, many Albanian witnesses are settled in different countries.
But they are not isolated.
Eda and I are serving one of the three Albanian circuits in Europe
that span branch territories.
Serving a multinational circuit takes extra effort and planning.
But, seem to you who have a scare for these people.
No matter the situation, it's worth it.
We are a small congregation in a foreign country.
Our circuit is now supported by Albanian speaking brothers
from several European countries.
And we feel the unity in our brotherhood even more.
At this region of convention,
brothers and sisters are attending from Germany, Austria, Belgium,
Great Britain, and Switzerland.
We have met many friends who speak our language.
We are learning a lot about them
and are encouraged by their example of faith.
In the circuit, those in northern Italy
are together with others in Germany, Austria, and Slovenia.
They are united across national borders
with others who speak Albanian.
That's beautiful, Alex.
United in the spiritual paradise.
I know borders. That's true.
I think about this, though, Alex, some say that language actually divides.
I mean, that goes back to the Tower of Babel.
And some might feel that, well, by grouping people into language groups,
you're actually dividing people.
How would you answer that?
Well, you know, language definitely has the potential to divide.
No question.
But honestly, by the way the organization is using language,
I see the opposite effect taking place.
You know, this project is not about promoting particular cultures
or particular languages.
What this project allows us to do is to reach across man-made borders
to unite our brothers and sisters by using their local language
to teach the true and pure language.
And that is unity, as we've seen in the video.
Well, we look forward to hearing about more of those details.
Thank you.
Just maybe in conclusion, Alex, one final thought.
Thinking about your assignment, is there one particular thought from Gilead?
I know there's probably many.
But is there one particular thought that you would like to especially apply in your assignment?
Yeah.
There are many.
Maybe just one that was repeatedly mentioned in class is how Jesus worked with others.
Never as a superior, but as a friend, as a confident, open trusted communication.
That's a beautiful example.
I just hope that I can pick up a little bit on this wonderful example
when I have the privilege to talk to these circuit overseers out there in this huge field.
Or when we talk to the other responsible brothers in the other branch offices
that it is this open, trusted communication as friends and as fellow workers
we all have the same goal furthering the preaching work.
That's a goal I have.
Very nice. It's a valuable point for all of us.
Well, Alex made Jehovah richly bless you and your wife Tabitha and your assignment.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Let's welcome our next guest and it's Brother Thomas Bohnfeld from Greenland.
Hey, welcome, Tommy.
You look very comfortable.
Oh, thank you, right?
So what do you call that?
This is an anoac.
You know it's all about staying warm in Greenland.
So actually this is a traditional formal wear and it is used for special occasions.
So many brothers wear it at the conventions on the day of baptism.
This is very special.
Well, I like Greenland already. Tell you that.
When I think of Greenland though, I'm thinking not Greenland.
I'm thinking ice, snow.
Yeah, you are right.
It is really a land of ice and snow.
Most of Greenland lies within the Arctic Circle.
The biggest part of the land is the Greenland ice sheet.
And it's up to 3,000 meters thick in the center.
And from there huge icebergs break off out to the sea.
Icebergs like this one.
Yes.
Yeah, that definitely sounds cool to me.
So what I wonder though is what are the people like in Greenland?
Ah, that's where the warmth is.
People in Greenland are very kind and warm-hearted.
Greenland is part of Kingdom of Denmark.
So many they speak Danish.
But the majority, the native Inuit, they speak Greenlandic.
Greenlandic, when I think of Greenlandic, the only thing that comes to mind is long words.
Yes, that's the first thing many people notice about Greenlandic.
For example, we have the title of the watchtower in two lines.
I don't think I can.
But you said it so well.
As I look at that though, I wonder, do you have spelling contests in Greenland?
No, we don't have chances.
You and Penina, do you speak Greenlandic?
Yes, we do now, but we're still learning.
Of course.
How did you learn Greenlandic?
So we are originally from Denmark and brought up in Denmark.
But interestingly, my parents actually were especially pioneers when they were young in Greenland and helped form a congregation.
Well, that's very interesting. That's a nice spiritual heritage to have.
And some years ago, we visited Greenland as a family.
And we see pictures here.
We still look relaxed, Thomas.
Actually, back then, I remembered.
Perhaps I could serve in Greenland sometime.
But I think that's what I think.
But then, years passed, I began to call Penina.
And when we were engaged to Mary, we asked the parents where we could serve.
And to our surprise, they asked us to start learning Greenlandic.
So we moved to Copenhagen and took some language courses.
And after three years, we were sent to Greenland as a specific pioneer and helped support the translation.
So three years, we were sent to Greenland as specific pioneers and helped support the translation office.
That's amazing. So it's almost like you were following in your parents footsteps then to Greenland.
So was it an easy adjustment? Denmark, Greenland?
No. Denmark and Greenland are very different.
But with the help from Jehovah and also from support from Brothers, we adapted.
Yeah. It looks like you fully adapted, actually.
I understand your assignment has changed a little bit over the years.
So now we are at the ATO in Luke in the Greenlandic ATO.
There are four of us in full time.
And we have more than 10 parts on computers.
Okay. So that's more than 14 in the ATO.
But it's still a small group.
That's a lot of work for a translation office.
Is there benefits? Have you seen the benefits from the work you're doing?
Yes, definitely.
So in Greenlandic, there's not much published secular.
But our publication has been published for many years.
And they're very well known.
So people really love when they see our literature.
And besides that, our videos in Greenlandic are great support for many of the knee-graders coming to support the Ministry in Greenlandic.
Right.
Now I wonder what the Ministry was like.
Now we did a little homework on Greenland.
I know there's five congregations in Greenland, about 170 publishers,
and around 56,000 people that live in Greenland.
But we also understand that a lot of them live in very remote villages.
So how do you reach those people in these isolated areas?
Well, that's all about timing.
Timing? Yeah.
But to help you understand it, we have a video from a congregation far north of Luke
in the village of Iluli-Set, meaning icebergs.
Well, let's have a look and let's visit the icebergs.
For about seven months of the year, Greenland looks like this.
But when the ice melts, signs of life begin to emerge.
And the brothers and sisters get moving.
The Danish congregation in the town of Iluli-Set
preaches also to Greenlandic speaking people.
It's the northernmost congregation in Greenland.
They travel to many remote villages to spread the good news in Greenlandic.
Their territory spans hundreds of miles.
Today, they are preaching in the village of Okartut.
It's good to be out of the boat after their long journey.
But their work is just beginning.
They've had good results in these villages before.
This is Sarah from a village further north.
She wanted to study, but she left too far away for a regular visit.
So, a sister in Iluli-Set studied with her over the phone.
She would tie into the meetings during the long, cold months of winter.
But she felt that wasn't enough.
So, she moved some 300 miles to Iluli-Set.
She remembers the tears at her first meeting.
Sarah was now with her spiritual family.
In time, she was baptized.
The weather and distances make it difficult for the brothers and sisters.
But they return to these villages year after year.
Searching for more friends of peace in the vast and isolated regions of Northern Greenland.
That was fantastic times.
But it looks like there is a lot of work to do in Greenland.
Yes, that is.
And arrangements have been made so that Sarah and other native speakers
they can tie into the Greenlandic meetings in Luke for some parts of the meeting.
And besides that, at our meetings in Luke,
we also use simultaneous translation using headphones and radio.
So that, whether we speak Danish or Greenlandic,
you can participate and benefit.
Wow, that is absolutely amazing.
How do you say wow in Greenlandic?
Gar du bin napa.
I'll leave that for you.
Thank you very much for being with us, Thomas.
And again, for you and your wife Penina as well,
we wish you Jehovah's Blessing in your assignment.
Well, so far we've been talking about unity and language.
And some of the students have prepared a song that addresses just those themes.
So let's enjoy the song that they've prepared to sing to their classmates.
Beautiful song.
Song in the 24 languages of the heart of their classmates, but with one voice.
Let's welcome our next guest, Miraf and Johannes Gorms from Ethiopia.
I just did the call you Johnny, actually.
Johnny, you and Miraf have a different assignment.
Could you explain what your assignment is?
We are not beta lights.
We serve in the circuit work.
But you like beta lights.
Like.
So what is the circuit work like in Ethiopia?
What are the people in Ethiopia like?
The two pen people are generally kind, warm and hospitable, open to talking.
Most of are religious people.
It is easy to start conversation because they love spiritual matters.
Okay.
Is there maybe one experience?
One special experience that stands out to you?
We were assigned a circuit in southern part of Ethiopia.
The two special panors.
They serve, they are one of them, ask me if I would go with him.
He makes written visit.
Two years ago, he met this man.
Now, he wants to go back again.
Wait, so this is after two years.
He had a nice call.
He studied with people there.
And now, two years later, he wants to go back.
So why did he wait so long?
Because it was too remote.
How remote was it?
It takes three days from nearby city to get there.
We started by bus and we arrived one small city.
Then we took a truck seven or nine hours.
Sometimes, we spent all the night.
So, sleeping on the road.
Okay, there is a picture.
That I slept well.
So, I presume you took a truck because there was no more buses.
So, the buses then take the truck.
After the truck, you walked?
I walked the rest of the way.
Short walk?
It depends what you call short.
If eleven hour is short to you, then yes.
Eleven hours.
So, what was it like walking eleven hours to this village?
When we walked in the jungle, I got scared.
I was thinking, if something happened here, how could I out this jungle?
How could you get out?
Yeah.
So, I prayed immediately, my thoughts changed.
From here to the wilderness, I was thinking, this is privilege.
Like a couple steps.
Interesting.
Number half, you're not with Johannes.
So, what are you thinking while he's gone?
I mean, this is three days already. He's gone.
That was the hardest part of my life.
Because there was no network to contact him.
I don't know whether he's alive, wound or lost.
I have no idea.
And we were in a circuit visit.
So, I should look strong in front of others.
So, I couldn't say anything.
So, I was praying and crying.
Alone.
So, you reached the village after your eleven hour walk.
You found the interested person?
He had another Bible defense.
The interested person has Bible students.
How long did you stay?
The plan was one or two days to spend them, but I couldn't.
Because of the interest you couldn't leave?
Yeah.
Because two things, the first thing, they are very interested.
So, I had to stay there.
The other things, our legs wound.
Like wood.
Yeah.
From eleven hours of walking.
But when we arrived there,
we became strong.
Our tired is elected.
Because the interested person very enjoyed that conversation.
When did you leave the village?
Sunday, Sunday morning.
Your legs were feeling better?
Yeah.
It's been nine hours.
We have got one area.
We have got a telephone.
So, I can't call her.
So, you walked nine hours to get to a telephone.
What was that phone call like, Muraf?
As I told you, I wanted to cry because I was so worried.
And he called and said my name.
So, I was so happy and I started to cry.
What's happened since then?
After that visit, do you know what's happened to them?
Most of them now.
They have got baptized recently.
One circuit overseer and one special painter, David Zim.
I have a video.
Maybe.
Would you like to see them?
No, maybe.
Let's have a look at the video, please.
Our journey begins here in Sorddo.
Sorddo has a striving, umhari congregation
and three congregations in Olaith.
And yet, the brothers travel to support
the search even in village far away.
Today, their destination is a small village of Salish.
The journey is long, but the brothers settle in
and enjoy the beautiful countryside.
The first stop is Saula, where our brothers and sisters
are waiting for them.
This is the end of the line for the bus ride.
Oh nice, it will be to have a good night's rest.
It is time to start walking.
Unless you can catch a ride on one of these.
Today, they cross valleys, mountains, and rivers.
Some small and some not so small.
Here the brothers have to wait through the rivers first,
then the drivers bring the motorbikes across.
I wish I had this option on my first trip.
One more stop, time for a delicious meal in Laha
with the local brothers.
I can still smell the fresh roasted coffee.
Finally, they make it to Salish.
How I miss these brothers and sisters.
I met this brother, here say go, on my first visit.
There are ten publishers now in Salish.
They conduct 24 Bible studies and many are attending the meetings.
To think, this all started with just one interested person.
How do our brothers feel to be part of Garth's organization?
Jehovah loved us, because of his love, he drew us to him.
He made us a part of the international brotherhood.
We are very happy and we thank Jehovah.
We thank him from our heart.
And I am thankful to Jehovah.
Zaki included these dear friends to join him in the search for more.
You must be very happy to see those faces.
This thinking about that trip, when you were out there walking in the jungle,
going all that way, what did you learn from that?
I saw Jehovah's hand during that difficult trip.
Jehovah cared me.
We didn't fear, because we saw Jehovah's hand.
We felt we are in Jehovah's hand.
Beautiful. What about you, Muraf, waiting alone,
not knowing what was happening to you, Hanna?
What did you learn from that experience?
At that time, I was thinking, I know that Jehovah can protect him.
So I was stilling myself this, and that kept me strong.
Doing Jehovah's will, Jehovah can protect him.
You're Hanna and Muraf, thank you so much for your experiences
and being with us on the Inside Story.
Thank you.
Every one of the students has a story.
You have a story, and maybe one day we'll all get to hear them.
But for today, we've just scratched the surface.
It's been so encouraging to see the lengths that our brothers and sisters will go
to find friends of peace, and it has been very touching to hear
the lengths that Jehovah will go to find his little sheep to bring them back.
We look forward to seeing you again another episode of The Inside Story,
and that's all for this time from the 145th class.
Thank you.
Well, we'd like to thank all those involved with producing The Inside Story.
It truly was appreciated by each one of us.